Partitioned Epoch Rewards Distribution (#15)
solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents: proposals/distributed-async-epoch-reward.md

process into two distinct phases: (1) rewards calculation, and (2) rewards
distribution.

### Rewards Calculation

In contrast to the current method of computing epoch rewards, which involves
directly computing rewards at the first slot of the epoch boundary in the bank
runtime, the new approach spreads the reward computation over multiple blocks.

As an example, in the Solana Labs validator client, the reward computation is
moved to a background service known as the `EpochRewardCalculationService`.
This service starts automatically when a validator starts and listens to a
designated channel for any incoming rewards calculation requests, performing
the necessary rewards calculations accordingly.

When the block on the network crosses the epoch boundary, a reward computation
request based on stake delegation and vote states of vote accounts at the epoch
boundary is sent to the `EpochRewardCalculationService` to start the process of
epoch reward computation. This marks the start of the reward computation phase.

The reward computation phase lasts for `N` blocks since the beginning of the
epoch boundary. When reaching block height `N` after the start of the

> `reward calculation phase`, the bank will mark it the end the `reward calculation phase`.

Author: It looks like last epoch, reward computation takes about 15s. 
592k/15*0.4  approximate 16K accounts per block.
That's when all the resources are used for reward computation. Assuming only allocating 1/4 of the resource for reward computation in async compuate per block, then it is about 4K account per block.

```
N = ceil(num_stake_account/4K). 
```

600K account will take 150 blocks, about 60 seconds. 
WDYT?

A conservative value of 1,000 is chosen for `N` to accommodate the existing
validators on Solana Mainnet Beta.

> At this point, the reward computation result should be available. In case that

Reviewer: I guess I still have this same question, even though this is marked as "resolved"

At the end of reward computation phase, a set of `EpochRewardsReserve` sysvar
accounts will be updated too. Each `RewardsReserve` records the reward balance
to be distributed for a particular block at block height `height` in `Reward Distribution`
phase. The set of stake rewards paid from `EpochRewardsReserve`
sysvar accounts form a complete partition of the total stake rewards.

```
struct EpochRewardReserve {
   balance: u64,
   height: u64,
   hash: Hash
}
```

`balance` is total amount of rewards (in lamports) to be distributed in this block.
`height` is the reward distribution absolute block height.
`hash` is the hash of all distributed rewards for this block.

### Reward Distribution

Reward distribution phase happens right after reward computation phase and
lasts for `M` blocks.

Based on current validator client's performance, 64 additional accounts can be
stored per tick without much performance impact for the block time. Given
that there are 64 ticks per block, each block will store 4,096 accounts.
The total number of blocks to distributed rewards is

```
M = ceil(num_stake_accounts/4096)
```

For each block, `i` in reward distribution phase, the rewards correspond to

> `EpochRewardReserve` sysvar account with `height=N+i` will be paid out.

Author: Good catch. Should be `height=epoc_start_height+N+i`.

and also simplify the over changes, and let us focus on solving the primary
bottleneck - Stake Rewards. Stake rewards are going to be paid out
asynchronously over multiple blocks.

For async stake rewards payout, we will separate the computation of rewards
from the actual distribution of rewards at the epoch boundary by dividing the
process into two distinct phases: (1) rewards calculation, and (2) rewards
distribution.

### Rewards Calculation

In contrast to the current method of computing epoch rewards, which involves
directly computing rewards at the first slot of the epoch boundary in the bank
runtime, the new approach spreads the reward computation over multiple blocks.

As an example, in the Solana Labs validator client, the reward computation is
moved to a background service known as the `EpochRewardCalculationService`.
This service starts automatically when a validator starts and listens to a
designated channel for any incoming rewards calculation requests, performing
the necessary rewards calculations accordingly.

When a block first crosses the epoch boundary, its bank will send a request to
the `EpochRewardCalculationService` to start the process of epoch reward

> computation. This marks the start of the reward computation phase.

Author: yeah. updated.

```
[(epoch, (reward_amount, root_hash))]
```
, where each entry corresponds to the reward for
one particular epoch. The maximum depth of the history are the same as the
depth of stake history, which is 512.

When reaching the end of reward computation phase, `EpochRewardProof` are
updated with the reward computation result. A new entry will be pushed into the
array. If the length of the history array reaches the maximum depth, the oldest
entry will popped.

```
struct RewardHistoryEntry {
   total: u64,                  // total rewards for this epoch
   distributed: u64,            // already distributed reward amount
}

type EpochReward = (Epoch, RewardHistoryEntry);

struct RewardHistory {
   rewards: [EpochReward; 512],
}
```

At the end of reward computation phase, a set of `EpochRewardsReserve` sysvar
accounts will be updated too. Each `RewardsReserve` records the reward balance
to be distributed for a particular block at block height `height` in `Reward Distribution`
phase. The set of stake rewards paid from `EpochRewardsReserve`
sysvar accounts form a complete partition of the total stake rewards.

```
struct EpochRewardReserve {
   balance: u64,

>    height: u64,

Author: Yes. absolute height. As @mvines suggested, this will make the query for reward distribution per block easier for the user, who many just have the block height.

   hash: Hash
}
```

`balance` is total amount of rewards (in lamports) to be distributed in this block.

> `index` is the reward distribution block height offset from reward computation end block.

Author: yes. Merge mistakes.

`balance` is total amount of rewards to be distributed in this block.
`height` is the reward distribution block height.
`hash` is the hash of all distributed rewards for this block.

### Reward Distribution

Reward distribution phase happens right after reward computation phase and
lasts for `M` blocks.

Based on current validator client's performance, 64 additional accounts can be

> stored per tick without noticeable performance impact for the block time. Given

Author: ok. rephrase it 60ms per block should be acceptable. :)

request based on stake delegation and vote states of vote accounts at the epoch
boundary is sent to the `EpochRewardCalculationService` to start the process of
epoch reward computation. This marks the start of the reward computation phase.

The reward computation phase lasts for `N` blocks since the beginning of the
epoch boundary. When reaching block height `N` after the start of the
`reward calculation phase`, the bank will mark it the end the `reward calculation phase`.
A conservative value of 1,000 is chosen for `N` to accommodate the most of the
validators on the network.

At this point, the reward computation result should be available. In case that
the reward computation result is not available yet at the `N_th_` block-height,
the bank runtime will block and wait until the computation is finished, before
processing any blocks with height greater than `N`.

At the end of the reward computation phase (end of block height `N`), a set of
sysvar accounts will be updated - `EpochRewardProof` and `RewardReserve`.

`EpochRewardProof` sysvar account maintains a history of epoch rewards. The
internal format of `EpochRewardProof` is an array of entries,
```

> [(epoch, (reward_amount, root_hash))]

Reviewer 2: What is the `root_hash`, and how is it computed and used?

`reward_amount` is `total_reward_amount` correct?

Reviewer 2: It would be useful for to include the number of `EpochRewardReserve` accounts to expect for each epoch

```
, where each entry corresponds to the reward for
one particular epoch. The maximum depth of the history are the same as the
depth of stake history, which is 512.

> When reaching the end of reward computation phase, `EpochRewardProof` are

Reviewer 2: The total rewards to distribute is known immediately at the epoch boundary as vote account rewards are still credited synchronously. So I think before freezing of the first new bank in an epoch, a new `EpochRewardProof` entry could be added for that epoch with the correct `reward_amount ` field.

If the `root_hash` is something that's still needed (but I'm not sure its purpose right now), perhaps it can be filled in at the end of reward computation phase (remains as `Hash::default()` until then to avoid requiring an `Option`)

updated with the reward computation result. A new entry will be pushed into the
array. If the length of the history array reaches the maximum depth, the oldest
entry will popped.

```
struct RewardHistoryEntry {
   total: u64,                  // total rewards for this epoch
   distributed: u64,            // already distributed reward amount
}

type EpochReward = (Epoch, RewardHistoryEntry);

> struct RewardHistory {

Reviewer 2: The EpochReward entry for the new epoch could be created at the first bank of the epoch as well, with the `distributed` amount equal to what was synchronously credited to the vote accounts

   rewards: [EpochReward; 512],
}
```

At the end of reward computation phase, a set of `EpochRewardsReserve` sysvar

> accounts will be updated too. Each `RewardsReserve` records the reward balance

Reviewer 2: > a set of `EpochRewardsReserve` sysvar accounts will be updated too

How is this set of accounts addressed?

to be distributed for a particular block at block height `height` in `Reward Distribution`
phase. The set of stake rewards paid from `EpochRewardsReserve`
sysvar accounts form a complete partition of the total stake rewards.

```
struct EpochRewardReserve {
   balance: u64,
   height: u64,
   hash: Hash
}
```

`balance` is total amount of rewards (in lamports) to be distributed in this block.

> `height` is the reward distribution absolute block height.

Reviewer 2: `height` is probably not even needed here, since it seems like the account address will be derived from block height?

> `hash` is the hash of all distributed rewards for this block.

Reviewer 2: Can you describe how this hash is derived and used more please

> ### Reward Distribution

Reviewer 2: An important topic that hasn't really been explicitly discussed is when the lamport supply increases and where those lamports are held until they are distributed. Here's one idea:

1. The bank capitalization increases like it currently does, upon the first bank of the epoch. This is fine because we still credit vote accounts synchronously
2.  The additional lamports that are pending stake account distribution are each held as real lamports in the respective `EpochRewardReserve` accounts. This means that the `EpochRewardReserve::balance` field could be removed entirely, as the account balance itself holds this value. This also requires that each `EpochRewardReserve` account hold a rent-exempt balance, and works around the problem of "where do the lamports held in each EpochRewardReserve account come from"
3. As the each `EpochRewardReserve` account is distributed, the actual sysvar account lamports go to zero and the account is cleaned up normally.

Reward distribution phase happens right after reward computation phase and
lasts for `M` blocks.

Based on current validator client's performance, 64 additional accounts can be
stored per tick without much performance impact for the block time. Given
that there are 64 ticks per block, each block will store 4,096 accounts.
The total number of blocks to distributed rewards is

```
M = ceil(num_stake_accounts/4096)
```

For each block, `i` in reward distribution phase, the rewards correspond to

> `EpochRewardReserve` sysvar account with `height=epoch_height+N+i` will be paid
> out.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`EpochRewardReserve` sysvar account with `height=epoch_height+N+i` will be distributed.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: The `RewardHistoryEntry::distributed` field gets updated as well to account for the new distribution right?

This partition is required to be deterministic for the current epoch, but also
random across different epochs. This can be achieved by hashing the account's

> pubkey with some epoch dependent values, sort the results, and divide them into

Reviewer 2: > some epoch dependent values

Please explicitly state what those values are in this document

> `M` bins. The epoch dependent value can be the epoch number, total rewards for

Reviewer 2: > can be

will be! :)
The order of the hashing is also important to be explicit about

the epoch, the leader pubkey for the epoch block, etc.

### Restrict Stake Account access

To avoid the complexity and potential rewards in zombie stake accounts, all
write access to stake accounts are restricted. That means any update to stake
accounts has to wait till the rewards distribution end. Any transactions
involving stake programs during the epoch rewarding phase will fail with a
unique transaction error code.

### Snapshot and Cluster Restart

> Due to the asynchronous nature of the rewards paying out, we can no longer just
> take the state of a particular bank as a snapshot, and restart the cluster from
> that snapshot, because there might be pending rewards computation in the
> background `EpochRewardCalculationService`, which need to be included in the
> snapshot during the reward paying out phase.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Due to the asynchronous nature of the rewards paying out there might be pending rewards computation in the
background `EpochRewardCalculationService`, which need to be included in the
snapshot during the reward distribution phase.
```

To accommodate this, a new field, `Option<RewardsResult>`, will be added to the bank
snapshot, which will then be included in the final snapshot archives.

> `RewardsResult` will record all the rewards payouts for the current epoch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`RewardsResult` will record all the reward distributions for the current epoch.
```

> For snapshots outside of rewards payout phase, this field will be None.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For snapshots outside of reward distributions phase, this field will be None.
```

`RewardResult` is only required for snapshots taken during epoch rewarding
phase.

When snapshot is taken during reward calculation phase, the `RewardsResult` may
not be available yet. In this case, the snapshot process will need to wait on
the `EpochRewardCalculationService` to finish the reward calculation
computation and get the result.

## Impact

There are the two main impacts of the changes to stake accounts during the
epoch rewarding phase.

The first impact is that stake accounts will see their rewards being credited a
few blocks later in the epoch than before. This delay is due to the
asynchronous reward distribution process, which is designed to reduce

> bottlenecks and improve efficiency in the payout process. While the delay may

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
bottlenecks and improve efficiency in the distribution process. While the delay may
```

that all stake accounts are properly accounted for and rewarded. While this may
be an inconvenience for some users, overall it is likely to help ensure the
fairness and accuracy of the reward distribution process.

Overall, the changes to stake accounts during the epoch rewarding phase are
intended to improve the efficiency, reliability of network's reward
distribution mechanism, and to minimize the risk of unintended consequences or
disruptions to the network's operations.

## Security Considerations

Epoch rewards in a blockchain system are an important component that helps to
incentivize network participants to secure the network and maintain its
operations. Changing epoch rewards can have a significant impact on the
network's overall stability and the behavior of network participants.
Therefore, any changes to epoch rewards should be carefully considered and
tested before rolling out.

The addition of sysvar accounts can provide some additional safeguards to
prevent large capital changes, but it is important to note that they do not
eliminate all risks associated with changing epoch rewards.

## Backwards Compatibility

> The new epoch payout approach will not be compatible with the old approach.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This new epoch calculation and distribution approach will not be compatible with the old approach.
```

accounts can be distributed per block. The total number of blocks needed tto
distributed rewards is

```
M = ((4096 - 1)+num_stake_accounts)/4096
```

During the reward distribution phase, for the block at `block_height`, the rewards will be distributed from the
`EpochRewardReserve` sysvar account with the address of
"hash(`SysvarRewardReserve11111111111111111111111111111111`, block_height). As
the stake_accounts receive their rewards from the reserve account, the balance
of the EpochRewardReserve will decrease. Once all rewards have been
distributed, the balance of the EpochRewardReserve account should be reduced to 0.

Before each reward distribution, the `EpochRewardReserve` account's balance
is checked to make sure there is enough balance to distribute the reward. After a
reward is distributed, the balance in `EpochRewardReserve` account is decreased
by the amount of the reward that was distributed. The hash of reward_account
pubkey and reward amount is accumulated when rewards are distributed. After all
the rewards are distributed from the reserve account for the block, the hash
computed from all the rewards distribution is verified against the hash stored

> in the `EpochRewardReserve` account to make sure they match.

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense to (re?)introduce a "root hash" in `RewardHistoryEntry` that's the hash of all the individual `EpochRewardReserve` hashes? 

There'd then be a "root accumulator hash" that starts empty and each `RewardHistoryEntry` hash is added to it. Once the "root accumulator hash" equals the "root hash", reward distribution should be complete and we can assert no future distributions through the remainder of the current epoch.

This would just be another safely check to ensure distributions are being made as intended.

updated.

### `EpochRewardHistory` Sysvar Account

`EpochRewardHistory` sysvar account maintains a history of epoch rewards. The
internal format of `EpochRewardHistory` is an array of `RewardHistoryEntry`,
where each entry corresponds to the reward for one particular epoch. The
maximum depth of the history are chosen to the same as the depth of stake
history for consistency, which is 512.

The layout of `EpochRewardHistory` sysvar is shown in the following pseudo code.

```
struct RewardHistoryEntry {
   total_reward_in_lamport: u64,          // total rewards for this epoch
   distributed_reward_in_lamport: u64,    // already distributed reward amount
}

type EpochReward = (Epoch, RewardHistoryEntry);

struct RewardHistory {
   rewards: [EpochReward; 512],
}
```

The `EpochRewardHistory` is updated at the start of the first block of the
epoch boundary (before any transactions are processed), as both the total epoch
rewards and vote account rewards become available at this time. Once the vote
account rewards have been distributed, a `RewardHistoryEntry` will be added to
the `EpochRewardHistory` array with the total amount of reward, a distributed

> value equal to the sum of the vote account rewards, and the number of reward
> reserve accounts for stake reward distribution. If the length of the history

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
value equal to the sum of the vote account rewards. If the length of the history
```

lasts for `M` blocks.

Based on current validator client's performance, 64 additional accounts can be
stored per tick time without much performance impact for the overall block
time. Given that each block time is 64 ticks time long, a total of 4,096
accounts can be distributed per block. The total number of blocks needed tto
distributed rewards is

```
M = ((4096 - 1)+num_stake_accounts)/4096
```

During the reward distribution phase, for the block at `block_height`, the rewards will be distributed from the
`EpochRewardReserve` sysvar account with the address of
"hash(`SysvarRewardReserve11111111111111111111111111111111`, block_height). As
the stake_accounts receive their rewards from the reserve account, the balance
of the EpochRewardReserve will decrease. Once all rewards have been
distributed, the balance of the EpochRewardReserve account should be reduced to 0.

Before each reward distribution, the `EpochRewardReserve` account's balance
is check to make sure there is enough balance to distribute the reward. After a
reward is distributed, the balance in `EpochRewardReserve` account is decreased
by the amount of the reward that are distributed. The hash of reward_account

> pubkey and reward amount are accumulated when rewards are paying out. After all

Reviewer 2: "paid" -> "distributed" 🙏🏼

the rewards are distributed from the reserve account for the block, the hash
computed from all the rewards distribution is verified against the hash stored

> in the `EpochReserve` to make sure they match.

Reviewer 2: `EpochReserve` still doesn't seem to exist in this doc?

---
simd: 'xxxx'
title: Partitioned Epoch Reward Distribution
authors:
  - Haoran Yi (Solana Labs)
category: Standard
type: Core
status: Draft
created: 2023-03-02
feature: (fill in with feature tracking issues once accepted)
---

## Summary

A new way to distribute epoch rewards across multiple blocks is proposed to
address the current performance problems associated with the reward
distribution in a single block at the start of the epoch.

## Motivation

The distribution of epoch rewards at the start block of an epoch becomes a
significant bottleneck due to the rising number of stake accounts and voting
nodes on the network.

To address this bottleneck, we propose a new approach for distributing the
epoch rewards over multiple blocks.

## Detailed Design

The major bottleneck for epoch reward distribution is to payout rewards to stake accounts. At the time of
writing, there are approximated 550K active stake accounts and 1.5K vote
accounts on Solana Mainnet Beta. Given the relatively small number of vote

> rewards, it makes sense to keep vote rewards payout the same. They can still be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
rewards, it makes sense to keep vote rewards distribution mechanism unchanged. They can still be
```

> paid out efficiently at the first block of the epoch boundary. This reduce the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
distributed efficiently at the first block of the epoch boundary. This reduce the
```

impact on rewards for vote account and also simplify the overall changes, and let
us focus on solving the primary bottleneck - Stake Rewards. Only Stake rewards are

> going to be paid out over multiple blocks.

Reviewer 3: new lawyer just dropped!

At this point, the reward computation result should be available. In case that
the reward computation result is not available yet at the `N_th_` block-height,
the bank runtime will block and wait until the reward computation is finished, before
processing any blocks with height greater than `N`.

At the end of the reward computation phase (end of block height `N`),
`EpochRewardHistory` sysvar account and a set of `RewardReserve` sysvar
accounts, which helps to track and verify the reward distribution progress, will be
updated.

### `EpochRewardHistory` Sysvar Account

`EpochRewardHistory` sysvar account maintains a history of epoch rewards. The
internal format of `EpochRewardHistory` is an array of `RewardHistoryEntry`,
where each entry corresponds to the reward for one particular epoch. The
maximum depth of the history are chosen to the same as the depth of stake history for consistency, which
is 512.

The layout of `EpochRewardHistory` sysvar is shown in the following pseudo code.

```
struct RewardHistoryEntry {
   total_reward_in_lamport: u64,          // total rewards for this epoch
   distributed_reward_in_lamport: u64,    // already distributed reward amount

>    number_reward_reserve_accounts: u32,   // number of reward reserve accounts for reward distribution

Reviewer 2: 🤔 I guess we don't really know `number_reward_reserve_accounts` under after the rewards calculation phase completes. I'm trying to remember the use case I had in mind when I originally suggested adding this field, and failing. So maybe we just remove it? Sorry

}

type EpochReward = (Epoch, RewardHistoryEntry);

struct RewardHistory {
   rewards: [EpochReward; 512],
}
```

> The `EpochRewardHistory` is updated at the first block of the epoch boundary,

Reviewer 2: To remove ambiguity, let's specify at the start or end of the first block. Whenever the current epoch reward calc/distribution occurs (I think at the start of the first block, before tx processing, right?)

as both the total epoch rewards and vote account rewards become available at

> this time. Once the vote account rewards have been paid out, a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
this time. Once the vote account rewards have been distributed, a
```

`RewardHistoryEntry` will be added to the `EpochRewardHistory` array with the
total amount of reward, a distributed value equal to the sum of the vote
account rewards, and the number of reward reserve accounts for stake reward
distribution. If the length of the history array reaches the maximum depth (512), the

> oldest entry will be removed from the array (i.e., "popped").

Reviewer 2: During this first block of the epoch, the M `EpochRewardReserve` accounts would also need to be created as well, if that's where the new reward lamports are going to be held until distribution (to keep the bank capitalization checks passing).

We should know M at this time because the total number of stake accounts is known and we distribute at a fixed rate of 64 stake accounts per tick

### `EpochRewardReserve` sysvar account

> A total of 1,000 sysvar addresses are reserved for `SysvarRewardReserve`

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need to specify a max of 1,000.

accounts.

```

> crate::declare_sysvar_id!("SysvarRewardReserve00111111111111111111111111111111", EpochRewardReserve);

Reviewer 2: It'll likely be easier on the code if the sysvar addresses are `SysvarRewardReserve11111111111111111111111111111111` hashed with the u64 block height that the reward is expected to be distributed during. We lose the pretty base58 addresses as a result but whatever, less complex code is better :)

crate::declare_sysvar_id!("SysvarRewardReserve00211111111111111111111111111111", EpochRewardReserve);
crate::declare_sysvar_id!("SysvarRewardReserve00311111111111111111111111111111", EpochRewardReserve);
...
crate::declare_sysvar_id!("SysvarRewardReserve99911111111111111111111111111111", EpochRewardReserve);

struct EpochRewardReserve {

>    balance_in_lamport: u64,

Reviewer 2: I still think we don't need `balance_in_lamport`, since the sysvar account itself can hold this balance (which implies that we can never distribute less than the rent-exempt minimum per block, which should be fine)

   rewards_hash: Hash,
}
```

Each `RewardsReserve` contains the total balance (in lamports) and the hash for

> all rewards that will be paid out from it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
all rewards that will be distributed from it.
```

```
rewards_hash = hash([(stake_account_key, reward_amount)])
```

At the end of reward computation phase, M `EpochRewardsReserve` sysvar
accounts are updated, where `M` corresponds to how many blocks will be in
the reward distribution phase, which is described in the next section.

### Reward Distribution

Reward distribution phase happens right after reward computation phase and
lasts for `M` blocks.

Based on current validator client's performance, 64 additional accounts can be
stored per tick time without much performance impact for the overall block
time. Given that each block time is 64 ticks time long, a total of 4,096
accounts can be distributed per block. The total number of blocks needed tto
distributed rewards is

```
M = ((4096 - 1)+num_stake_accounts)/4096
```

> During the reward distribution phase, rewards will be paid out from the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During the reward distribution phase, rewards will be distributed from the
```

`EpochRewardReserve` sysvar account with the address
`SysvarRewardReserve_{i_th}_111111111` for the `i_th` block. As the
stake_accounts receive their rewards from the reserve account, the balance of
the EpochRewardReserve will decrease. Once all rewards have been paid out, the
balance of the EpochRewardReserve account should be reduced to 0. Before each
reward distribution, the `EpochRewardReserve` account's balance is check to
make sure there is enough balance to pay the reward. After a reward is
distributed, the balance in `EpochRewardReserve` account is decreased by the
amount of the reward that are paid out. The hash of reward_account pubkey and reward amount are accumulated when rewards are paying out.
After all the rewards are

> paid out from the reserve account for the block, the hash computed from all the rewards

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
distributed from the reserve account for the block, the hash computed from all the rewards
```

> payout is verified against the hash stored in the `EpochReserve` to make sure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
distribution is verified against the hash stored in the `EpochReserve` to make sure
```

> distribution is verified against the hash stored in the `EpochReserve` to make sure

Reviewer 2: By `EpochReserve`, do you mean `RewardHistoryEntry`?  The root hash makes sense to me now, thank for the explanation here, but I don't see it in `RewardHistoryEntry` anymore?

they match.

> To ensure that each block pays a subset of the rewards in a deterministic

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To ensure that each block distributes a subset of the rewards in a deterministic
```

manner for the current epoch, while also randomizing the distribution across
different epochs, the partitioning of all rewards will be done in a specific
way. This will involve hashing the account's public key with the epoch number,
sorting the resulting values, and dividing them into `M` bins. This process will
ensure that the reward distribution is deterministic for the current epoch,
while also introducing a degree of randomness between epochs.

### Restrict Stake Account access

To avoid the complexity and potential rewards in unexpected stake accounts, all
write access to stake accounts are restricted. That means any update to stake
accounts has to wait till the rewards distribution end. Any transactions
referencing the native staking program during the epoch rewarding phase will
fail with a unique transaction error code -
"LockedRewardAccountsDuringEpochReward".

### Snapshot and Cluster Restart

> Due to the fact that rewards are paying over multiple blocks, snapshots taken

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Due to the fact that rewards are distributed over multiple blocks, snapshots taken
```

during reward distribution phase for cluster restart, need to store the
reward calculation result.

> To accommodate this, a new field, `Option<RewardsResult>`, is added to the

Reviewer 2: I feel the remainder of this section can be omitted from this doc, since it's Labs validator client specific

bottleneck - Stake Rewards. Stake rewards are going to be paid out
asynchronously over multiple blocks.

For async stake rewards payout, we will separate the computation of rewards
from the actual distribution of rewards at the epoch boundary by dividing the
process into two distinct phases: (1) rewards calculation, and (2) rewards
distribution.

### Rewards Calculation

In contrast to the current method of computing epoch rewards, which involves
directly computing rewards at the first slot of the epoch boundary in the bank
runtime, the new approach involves moving the reward computation to a
background service known as the `EpochRewardCalculationService`. This service
starts automatically when a validator starts and listens to a designated
channel for any incoming rewards calculation requests, performing the necessary
rewards calculations accordingly.

When a block first crosses the epoch boundary, its bank will send a request to
the `EpochRewardCalculationService` to start the process of epoch reward
computation. This marks the start of the reward computation phase.

However, multiple rewards computation requests can be generated when there are

> forks at the epoch boundaries.

Author: > 

Interesting!

But I don't think this will work with StakeCache. I believe that StakeCache is shared for all the banks in the same fork. That means when we start reward computation when the epoch start bank is rooted. The StakeCache has already moved on. 
To make this work, we will need to reload all stake accounts from accounts_db then.

> forks at the epoch boundaries.

Reviewer 2: > an we send the request to EpochRewardCalculationService when the bank is rooted instead?

No, because roots are local to a validator and not deterministic across the entire cluster

> forks at the epoch boundaries.

Author: Yeah. We can omit the implementation details from the proposal.

The following diagram illustrates a fork happening at the epoch boundary `N`.

```
N-1 -- N -- N+1
     \
      \
        N+2
```

Two rewards calculation requests are sent out at slot `N` and`N+2`, since they
both cross the epoch boundary and are on different forks. But the second
computation is not necessary because they share the same parent node before the
start of the epoch. The inputs, vote_accounts/stake_account, to the rewards
calculation will be identical.

To avoid this repeated computation, the signature of the computation requests
is calculated.

```

> calculation_signature = hash(epoch_number, [&stake_accounts], [&vote_accounts], [&stake_delegations])

Author: yes.

> calculation_signature = hash(epoch_number, [&stake_accounts], [&vote_accounts], [&stake_delegations])

Reviewer 2: ok cool. do you have a sense for now long it'll take to compute this hash, especially with 600k+ stake accounts? 
as a nit, I'm not sure we need `epoch_number` in the `calculation_signature`. also wouldn't `stake_delegations` be essentially covered already by hashing the full contents of the stake and vote accounts

> calculation_signature = hash(epoch_number, [&stake_accounts], [&vote_accounts], [&stake_delegations])

Author: Yes. epoch_number is not needed for the signature computation. 

The hash is only computed from the `[vote_account]` and `[stake_account]`. 

One implementation is to compute individual hash for [vote_account, delegated_stake accounts]. Then hash them together to get the final hash as the signature.

Maybe this can be simplified to collect all vote_accounts and stake_accounts into one array then hash the array at once, since all delegation info is captured in the stake_accounts? 

I will measure how long it takes to hash 600K stake accounts. If that takes too long, we could parallelize the hash computation.

```
    pub fn compute_rewards_calc_signature(
        &self,
        vote_with_stake_delegations_map: &DashMap<Pubkey, VoteWithStakeDelegations>,
    ) -> Hash {
        // compute individual vote/stake accounts hash
        let mut hashes: Vec<(Pubkey, Hash)> = Vec::new();

        vote_with_stake_delegations_map.iter().for_each(|x| {
            let mut hasher = Hasher::default();

            let vote_pubkey = x.key();
            let vote_delegation = x.value();
            let VoteWithStakeDelegations {
                vote_state,
                vote_account,
                delegations,
            } = vote_delegation;

            // compute vote account hash
            let vote_state_data = serialize(vote_state).unwrap();
            let vote_hash = crate::accounts_db::AccountsDb::hash_account_state(
                &vote_state_data[..],
                vote_account,
                vote_pubkey,
            );
            hasher. Update(vote_hash.as_ref());

            // compute delegation stake account hash (sorted by stake_pubkeys)
            for (stake_pubkey, stake_account) in delegations.iter().sorted_by_key(|x| x.0) {
                let stake_state_data = serialize(stake_account.stake_state()).unwrap();
                let hash = crate::accounts_db::AccountsDb::hash_account_state(
                    &stake_state_data[..],
                    stake_account.account(),
                    stake_pubkey,
                );
                hasher. Update(hash.as_ref());
            }

            let hash = crate::accounts_db::AccountsDb::to_hash(hasher);
            hashes. Push((*vote_pubkey, hash));
        });

        // compute final hash (sorted by vote_pubkeys)
        let mut hasher = Hasher::default();
        for (_key, hash) in hashes.iter().sorted_by_key(|x| x.0) {
            hasher. Update(hash.as_ref());
        }
        let result = crate::accounts_db::AccountsDb::to_hash(hasher);
        info!(
            "rewards_calc_request_signature: {}, slot {}",
            result,
            self. Slot()
        );
        result
    }
```

> calculation_signature = hash(epoch_number, [&stake_accounts], [&vote_accounts], [&stake_delegations])

Author: It takes 15s to compute the hash for 600K stake accounts. :(

> calculation_signature = hash(epoch_number, [&stake_accounts], [&vote_accounts], [&stake_delegations])

Reviewer 2: RIP. What if we perform the background rewards calc for all new banks with a parent in the previous epoch. This may result in the identical computation for some forks across the boundary, but less of an issue since it's not synchronous.

We could reduce the duplicate computation by using a strategy of chunking the background rewards calc across blocks for the fork. So say we want the rewards credit to occur at block height 100 after the epoch boundary, each new block post epoch will cause 1% of the background rewards calc for that fork. If a fork is abandoned, then the background rewards calc for that fork is also abandoned

> calculation_signature = hash(epoch_number, [&stake_accounts], [&vote_accounts], [&stake_delegations])

Author: Yeah. Complete Hash is too expensive. 

One idea is to use the slot of the last parent block before the epoch as key. All bocks forked from the same last parent in last epoch should produce the same rewards result (in the same way that `epoch_stakes` was populated as @brooksprumo pointed out) .

```

Computation requests with same signature are discarded. In the above example,
there are no stake/vote accounts changes between slot `N` and `N+2`, and the
second computation request will be discarded.

The reward computation phase lasts for `N` blocks. When reaching block height
`N` after the start of the `reward calculation phase`, the bank will mark it
the end the `reward calculation phase`.

At this point, the reward computation result should be available. In case that
the reward computation result is not available yet at the `N_th_` block-height,

> the bank runtime will halt and wait until the computation is finished, before

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the bank runtime will block and wait until the computation is finished, before
```

processing any blocks with height greater than `N`.

> At the end of the reward computation phase, a set of sysvar accounts will be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the end of the reward computation phase (end of block height `N`), a set of sysvar accounts will be
```

updated - `EpochRewardProof` and `RewardReserve`.

`EpochRewardProof` sysvar account maintains a history of epoch rewards. The
internal format of `EpochRewardProof` is an array of entries,
```
[(epoch, (reward_amount, root_hash))]
```
, where each entry corresponds to the reward for
one particular epoch. The maximum depth of the history are the same as the

> depth of stake history, which is 512. The `root_hash` of the merkle tree for

Reviewer 2: I think we should remove the merkle tree stuff entirely. If we need to add it in the future then we can deal with it then

rewards as transactions.

When reaching the end of reward computation phase, `EpochRewardProof` are
updated with the reward computation result. A new entry will be pushed into the
array. If the length of the history array reaches the maximum depth, the oldest
entry will popped.

```
struct RewardHistoryEntry {
   total: u64,                  // total rewards for this epoch
   distributed: u64,            // already distributed reward amount
   root_hash: Option<Hash>,     // root-hash of reward merkle tree
}

type EpochReward = (Epoch, RewardHistoryEntry);

struct RewardHistory {
   rewards: [EpochReward; 512],
}
```

At the end of reward computation phase, a set of `EpochRewardsReserve` sysvar
accounts will be updated too. Each `RewardsReserve` records the reward balance
to be distributed for a particular block in `Reward Distribution` phase, which
captures a particular subset of stakes rewards to be paid at the `index` block in
the reward distribution phase. The complete subset of stake rewards forms a
partition of the all the stake rewards.

```
struct EpochRewardReserve {
   balance: u64,
   index: u64,
   hash: Hash
}
```

> `balance` is total amount of rewards to be distributed in this block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`balance` is total amount of rewards (in lamports) to be distributed in this block.
```

> `index` is the reward distribution block hight offset from reward computation end block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`index` is the reward distribution block height offset from reward computation end block.
```

also since `index’ is a `u64`, using the absolute block height instead of an offset would probably be easier on users that want to read the value

`hash` is the hash of all distributed rewards for this block.

### Reward Distribution

Reward distribution phase happens right after reward computation phase and

> lasts for `M` blocks. For each block, `i` in reward distribution phase, the

Reviewer 2: I feel like it’s better to target a fixed number of stake accounts per block, rather than a total number of blocks (M), as this will lead to more predictable runtime behavior if the number of stake accounts increases significantly

rewards correspond to `EpochRewardReserve` sysvar account with `index=i` will
be paid out, approximate `1/M` of the total stake reward accounts.

This partition is required to be deterministic for the current epoch, but also
random across different epochs. This can be achieved by hashing the account's
pubkey with some epoch dependent values, sort the results, and divide them into
`M` bins. The epoch dependent value can be the epoch number, total rewards for
the epoch, the leader pubkey for the epoch block, etc. `M` are chosen based on

> 50K account per block, which equal to `ceil(num_stake_accounts/50,000)`.

Author: > Why 50k accounts per block? Would it make sense to include that reasoning in this proposal? Do we need to add any levers-to-pull in order to change this amount later (or just deal with it later)?

Good question. 

Looking at the most recent epoch stats on mainnet, it takes about 10 seconds to store 592K stake rewards. 50K reward store will be around 800ms, which is a reasonable overhead for block times during reward distribution phase.

> 50K account per block, which equal to `ceil(num_stake_accounts/50,000)`.

Author: 800ms more.

> 50K account per block, which equal to `ceil(num_stake_accounts/50,000)`.

Reviewer 2: 100%, target block time really should remain 400ms

> 50K account per block, which equal to `ceil(num_stake_accounts/50,000)`.

Reviewer 2: goal: network remains butter across the epoch boundary

> 50K account per block, which equal to `ceil(num_stake_accounts/50,000)`.

Author: 4000 accounts per block sounds good me. 

Another overhead is that there will be 150 `EpochRewardReserve` accounts, which should be fine too.

> 50K account per block, which equal to `ceil(num_stake_accounts/50,000)`.

Reviewer 2: sure that seems ok. I'm tempted to consider a more dynamic approach to adjust to changing node performance over time, but I feel this could be a follow-up SIMD if needed down the road.

`ACCOUNTS_PER_TICK` might be a nice way to express this number (~64 accounts per tick)

### Restrict Stake Account access

To avoid the complexity and potential rewards in zombie stake accounts, all
write access to stake accounts are restricted. That means any update to stake
accounts has to wait till the rewards distribution end. Any transactions

> involving stake programs during the epoch rewarding phase will be blocked.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
involving stake programs during the epoch rewarding phase will fail with a unique transaction error code.
```

> involving stake programs during the epoch rewarding phase will fail with a unique transaction error code.

Reviewer 2: > If zombie accounts are the issue, can we allow write access for instructions that don't close accounts?

The concern was around implementation complexity. It's _much_ cleaner and safer to just disable all stake program access until the rewards are distributed rather than considering all possible execution paths through the stake program and missing one.

It's expected that the stake program would only be inaccessible for a minute or so at worst. And the argument was made that this is effectively already the case at epoch boundaries since the chain stalls while rewards are paid. So the stake program is _already_ inaccessible and this proposal simply permits other transactions to execute during the time that the stake program is currently offline

### Snapshot and Cluster Restart

Due to the asynchronous nature of the rewards paying out, we can no longer just
take the state of a particular bank as a snapshot, and restart the cluster from
that snapshot, because there might be pending rewards computation in the
background `EpochRewardCalculationService`, which need to be included in the
snapshot during the reward paying out phase.

> To accommodate this, a new field, `RewardsResult`, will be added to the bank

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To accommodate this, a new field, `Option<RewardsResult>`, will be added to the bank
```

This will allow you to remove the “However, RewardsResult will be optional” from the next paragraph as it’s now obvious

the first block of the epoch boundary. This reduces the impact of rewards for
vote account and also simplifies the overall changes, and let us focus on solving
the primary bottleneck - Stake Rewards. Only Stake rewards are going to be
distributed out over multiple blocks.

In the new stake rewards distribution approach, we will separate the computation of
rewards from the actual distribution of rewards at the epoch boundary by
dividing the process into two distinct phases: (1) rewards calculation, and (2)
rewards distribution.

The "reward calculation" phase is defined as the blocks that fall under it are
those where time is allocated to calculating the rewards, while the "rewards
distribution" phase is defined as the blocks that fall under it are those where
time is allocated to distributing the rewards.

### Rewards Calculation

The reward computation phase lasts for first `N` block heights since the
beginning of the epoch. When reaching block height `N` after the start block
of the `reward calculation phase`, the bank will mark it the end the
`reward calculation phase`. A conservative value of 1,000 is chosen for `N` to

> accommodate the existing validators on Solana Mainnet Beta.

Reviewer: Or maybe I'm confused... is the way this is expected to work that the validator works on the calculations and keeps everything in some temporary cache until block epoch-boundary +1000, at which point all the sysvar accounts are pushed into account state en masse?
If so, can we state that more clearly?

the `EpochRewardReserve` accounts are filled and the reward computation phase
is complete, the `root_hash` is calculated by hashing all the
`EpochRewardReserve` hashes.

```
root_hash = Hash(EpochRewardReserve[..].rewards_hash)

                     +-------------+
                     |             |
                     |  root_hash  |
                     |             |
                     +------+------+
                            |
    +--------------+--------+-----------+
    |              |                    |
+---+----+   +-----+--+             +---+-----+
|reserve |   | reserve|   ......    | reserve |
| hash   |   |  hash  |             |  hash   |
+--------+   +--------+             +---------+

```

### `EpochRewardReserve` Sysvar Account

The address for a particular `EpochRewardReserve` account is derived from the
base Sysvar RewardReserve address, by hashing
`SysvarRewardReserve11111111111111111111111111111111` with the u64 block height
for the corresponding reward distribution block during the reward
distribution phase.

```
crate::declare_sysvar_id!("SysvarRewardReserve11111111111111111111111111111", EpochRewardReserve);

struct EpochRewardReserve {

>    rewards_hash: Hash,

Reviewer 2: little nit, to be consistent with the new `root_hash` diagram
```suggestion
   reserve_hash: Hash,
```

If this looks like there's a couple other instances of `reserve_hash` in the doc that could be renamed as well

`SysvarRewardReserve11111111111111111111111111111111` with the u64 block height
for the corresponding reward distribution block during the reward
distribution phase.

```
crate::declare_sysvar_id!("SysvarRewardReserve11111111111111111111111111111", EpochRewardReserve);

struct EpochRewardReserve {
   reserve_hash: Hash,
}
```

The account balance of `RewardsReserve` is equal to the total amount (in
lamports) of all rewards to be distributed in a block. The `reserve_hash` is
computed from the rewards in the block as follows.

```
reserve_hash = hash([(stake_account_key, reward_amount)])
```

At the end of reward computation phase, M `EpochRewardsReserve` sysvar
accounts are updated, where `M` corresponds to how many blocks will be in
the reward distribution phase, which is described in the next section.

### Reward Distribution

Reward distribution phase happens right after reward computation phase and
lasts for `M` blocks.

Based on current validator client's performance, 64 additional accounts can be
stored per tick time without much performance impact for the overall block
time. Given that each block time is 64 ticks time long, a total of 4,096

> accounts can be distributed per block. The total number of blocks needed tto
> distributed rewards is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
accounts can be distributed per block. The total number of blocks needed to
distribute rewards is
```

> distributed rewards is

Reviewer: This chunking happens in the rewards calculation phase, right? I feel like this information makes more sense in that section.

the rewards are distributed from the reserve account for the block, the hash
computed from all the rewards distribution is verified against the hash stored
in the `EpochRewardReserve` account to make sure they match.

During the reward distribution phase, there is a "root accumulator hash" that
starts empty and is gradually filled by adding each hash of a
`EpochRewardReserve`. The distribution process continues until the "root
accumulator hash" matches the "root hash" stored in `EpochRewardHistory`. At this
point, the reward distribution for the current epoch is complete and we can
safely assume that there will be no further distributions for the remainder of
the epoch.

To ensure that each block distributes a subset of the rewards in a deterministic
manner for the current epoch, while also randomizing the distribution across
different epochs, the partitioning of all rewards will be done in a specific
way. This will involve hashing the account's public key with the epoch number,
sorting the resulting values, and dividing them into `M` bins. This process will
ensure that the reward distribution is deterministic for the current epoch,

> while also introducing a degree of randomness between epochs.

Reviewer: Hmm, isn't this a fundamental part of the rewards calculation process? Why is it not included in that section? Feels like an afterthought, way down here.
Where is the partitioned list of stake account keys stored?

relatively small number of vote accounts, it makes sense to keep vote rewards
distribution mechanism unchanged. They can still be distributed efficiently at
the first block of the epoch boundary. This reduces the impact of rewards for
vote account and also simplifies the overall changes, and let us focus on
solving the primary bottleneck - Stake Rewards. Only Stake rewards are going to
be distributed out over multiple blocks.

In the new stake rewards distribution approach, we will separate the
computation of rewards from the actual distribution of rewards at the epoch
boundary by dividing the process into two distinct phases:

   1. rewards calculation phase - during which, the epoch reward for all
      activate stake accounts are computed.

   1. rewards distribution phase - during which, the calculated epoch rewards
      for the active stake accounts are distributed.

### Rewards Calculation

Reward calculation phase computes all the rewards that need to be distributed
for the active stake accounts, and partitions the reward into a number of
chunks. Each of the chunks will be distributed by a separate block in the

> `reward distribution Phase`.

Reviewer: I don't see this change committed.

To help track and verify the reward distribution in the next phase, two new
sysvar accounts are introduced: (a) `EpochRewardHistory` sysvar account and (b)
`RewardReserve` sysvar accounts. These sysvar accounts are updated at the
boundary blocks (i.e. first and last blocks) in the reward calculation phase.
More details of these two sysvar accounts are described in the following
sections.

The reward computation phase lasts *exactly* for `N` block heights since
the beginning of the epoch. When reaching block height `N` after the start
block of the `reward calculation phase`, the bank will mark it the end the
`reward calculation phase`.

Based on current validator statistics on Solana Mainnet Beta, a conservative

> value of 1,000 is chosen for `N`.

Reviewer: I can't remember if I asked before, but I think it would be useful to include a little information about the statistics used to pick this value. Something like: it currently takes XXms for such-and-such node to compute rewards for the ~550K active stake accounts on mainnet-beta. This is approximately XX blocks at the cluster's average block rate.

At the end of the `reward calculation phase`, aka. `N` block height from the
start of the epoch, the reward computation result is retrieved and partitioned
into `M` chunks, which will be distributed during the `reward distribution`
phase.

> Note that if the reward calculation finished before `N` block height, the

Reviewer: As I was typing my previous comment about statistics, I got wondering... does block height make sense for this? Or would num slots be better? I think the actual wallclock duration of block-height N is likely to be a lot more variable than N slots, in times of great forking. Obviously not all slots are confirmed, so what we'd actually be waiting for is the first confirmed block after `epoch boundary + N slots`, not unlike how rewards work now for the first block in the epoch.

Reviewer: You put a thumbs up here, but did you reject this idea?

result should be cached until `N` block height. If the reward calculation is
slow and the result is not available yet at block-height `N`, the bank runtime
will block and wait until the reward computation is finished, before processing

> any blocks with height greater than `N`.

Reviewer: I still think this section is a bit confusing. Is this paraphrasing correct?

Rewards calculation is kicked off at the beginning of the epoch to run in the background on the node as replay continues. The computation may take a variable length of time as measured by block replay and confirmation. However, the rewards calculation phase will be considered to be complete after `N` blocks have elapsed since the beginning of the epoch, where `N` is a constant defined in the protocol. If the computation by a particular node is not complete by this point, that node's replay will wait at block height `epoch boundary + N` until the computation finishes.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add a sentence before this that says something like this, as a transition:
After the full rewards list is calculated, the list is partitioned into distribution chunks.

To ensure that each block distributes a subset of the rewards in a
deterministic manner for the current epoch, while also randomizing the
distribution across different epochs, the partitioning of all rewards will be
done as follows. First, the account's public keys are hashed with the epoch
number (i.e. sha256 hash from solana_sdk::program::hashv). Then, they are

> sorted and divided them into `M` bins. This process will ensure that the reward

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sorted and divided into `M` bins. This process will ensure that the reward
```

> sorted and divided them into `M` bins. This process will ensure that the reward

Reviewer: I assume they are sorted by the hash output, but might want to be explicit.

distribution is deterministic for the current epoch, while also introducing a
degree of randomness between epochs.

> To minimize the impact of block time during reward distribution phase, 64
> additional accounts are stored per tick time. Given that each block time is 64
> ticks time long, a total of 4,096 accounts can be distributed per block. The
> total number of blocks needed to distributed rewards is given by the following
> formula to avoid using floating point value arithmetics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To minimize the impact on block processing time during the reward distribution phase, the
number of additional accounts stored per tick will be limited to 64. Given that each block is 64
ticks long, a total of 4,096 accounts can be distributed per block. The
total number of blocks needed to distributed rewards is given by the following
formula to avoid using floating point value arithmetic:
```

`EpochRewardHistory` sysvar account maintains a history of epoch rewards. The
internal format of `EpochRewardHistory` is an array of `RewardHistoryEntry`,
where each entry corresponds to the reward for one particular epoch. The
maximum depth of the history is chosen to be the same as the depth of stake
history for consistency, which is 512.

The layout of `EpochRewardHistory` sysvar is shown in the following pseudo code.

```
struct RewardHistoryEntry {
   total_reward_in_lamport: u64,          // total rewards for this epoch
   distributed_reward_in_lamport: u64,    // already distributed reward amount
   root_hash: Option<Hash>,               // hash computed from all EpochRewardReserves
}

type EpochReward = (Epoch, RewardHistoryEntry);

struct RewardHistory {
   rewards: [EpochReward; 512],
}
```

The `EpochRewardHistory` is updated at the start of the first block of the
epoch (before any transactions are processed), as both the total epoch rewards
and vote account rewards become available at this time. Once the vote account
rewards have been distributed, a `RewardHistoryEntry` will be added to the
`EpochRewardHistory` array with the total amount of rewards and the amount

> distributed, which is equal to the sum of the vote account rewards. value equal
> to the sum of the vote account rewards. If the length of the history array

Reviewer: ```suggestion
distributed, which is equal to the sum of the vote account rewards. If the length of the history array
```

in the `EpochRewardReserve` account to make sure they match.

During the reward distribution phase, there is a "root accumulator hash" that
starts empty and is gradually filled by adding each hash of a
`EpochRewardReserve`. The distribution process continues until the "root
accumulator hash" matches the "root hash" stored in `EpochRewardHistory`. At this
point, the reward distribution for the current epoch is complete and we can
safely assume that there will be no further distributions for the remainder of
the epoch.

### Restrict Stake Account Access

To avoid the complexity and potential rewards in unexpected stake accounts, all
write access to stake accounts are restricted. That means any update to stake
accounts has to wait till the rewards distribution end. Any transactions
referencing the native staking program during the epoch rewarding phase will
fail with a unique transaction error code -
"LockedRewardAccountsDuringEpochReward".

### Snapshot and Cluster Restart

Due to the fact that rewards are paying over multiple blocks, snapshots, which
are taken during reward distribution phase, need to store the reward

> calculation result additionally. When a node restart from those snapshots, it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
calculation result. When a node restart from those snapshots, it
```

Reviewer: Also, I think I asked this before and maybe I missed when you address this... where is the calculation result stored in addition to the snapshot? Bank for slot `epoch boundary + N`? This would be a good thing to add to the calculation phase section.

for the active stake accounts, and partitions the reward into a number of
chunks. Each of the chunks will be distributed by a separate block in the
`reward distribution Phase`.

To help track and verify the reward distribution in the next phase, two new
sysvar accounts are introduced: (a) `EpochRewardHistory` sysvar account and (b)
`RewardReserve` sysvar accounts. These sysvar accounts are updated at the
boundary blocks (i.e. first and last blocks) in the reward calculation phase.
More details of these two sysvar accounts are described in the following
sections.

The reward computation phase lasts *exactly* for `N` block heights since
the beginning of the epoch. When reaching block height `N` after the start
block of the `reward calculation phase`, the bank will mark it the end the
`reward calculation phase`.

On Solana Mainnet Beta, the 90% cut-off of the epoch reward computation time
for all the nodes is around 40 seconds for the ~550K active stake accounts.
This is approximately 1000 blocks at the cluster's average block rate (40ms
per block). Therefore, a conservative value of 1,000 is chosen for `N`.

At the end of the `reward calculation phase`, aka. `Epoch_start + N` block

> height, the reward computation process is synchronized with the bank replay

Author: This is obsolete. 
I will update the proposal with sync reward compuation.

base Sysvar RewardReserve address and u64 block height for the corresponding reward
distribution block during the reward distribution phase, i.e.
`address = hash("SysvarRewardReserve11111111111111111111111111111", block_height)`.

```
crate::declare_sysvar_id!("SysvarRewardReserve11111111111111111111111111111", EpochRewardReserve);

struct EpochRewardReserve {
   reserve_hash: Hash,
}
```

The account balance of `RewardsReserve` is equal to the total amount (in
lamports) of all rewards to be distributed in a block. The `reserve_hash` is
computed from the rewards in the block as follows.

```
reserve_hash = hash([(stake_account_key, reward_amount)])
```

At the end of reward computation phase, M `EpochRewardsReserve` sysvar
accounts are updated, where `M` corresponds to how many blocks will be in
the reward distribution phase, which is described in the next section.

### Reward Distribution

Reward distribution phase happens right after reward computation phase and
lasts for `M` blocks. Each of the `M` blocks is responsible for distributing
the reward from one partition of the rewards stored in the `EpochRewardReserve`

> account, which address

Reviewer: ```suggestion
account, the one at the address
```

`hash("SysvarRewardReserve11111111111111111111111111111", block_height)`.

During the reward distribution phase, for the block at `block_height`, the
rewards will be distributed from the `EpochRewardReserve` sysvar account with
the address of "hash(`SysvarRewardReserve11111111111111111111111111111111`,

> block_height). As the stake_accounts receive their rewards from the reserve

Reviewer: Remove this sentence? It repeats what you just said in the previous sentence.

> During the reward distribution phase, for the block at `block_height`, the
> rewards will be distributed from the `EpochRewardReserve` sysvar account with
> the address of "hash(`SysvarRewardReserve11111111111111111111111111111111`,
> block_height). As the stake_accounts receive their rewards from the reserve

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the reward distribution phase, for the block at `block_height`, the
rewards will be distributed from the `EpochRewardReserve` sysvar account with
the address of "hash(`SysvarRewardReserve11111111111111111111111111111111`,
block_height). As the stake accounts receive their rewards from the reserve
```

account, the balance of the EpochRewardReserve will decrease. Once all rewards
have been distributed, the balance of the EpochRewardReserve account should be
reduced to 0.

Before each reward distribution, the `EpochRewardReserve` account's balance
is checked to make sure there is enough balance to distribute the reward. After a
reward is distributed, the balance in `EpochRewardReserve` account is decreased

> by the amount of the reward that was distributed. The hash of reward_account
> pubkey and reward amount is accumulated when rewards are distributed. After all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by the amount of the reward that was distributed. The hash of reward account
address and reward amount is accumulated when rewards are distributed. After all
```

the rewards are distributed from the reserve account for the block, the hash
computed from all the rewards distribution is verified against the hash stored
in the `EpochRewardReserve` account to make sure they match.

During the reward distribution phase, there is a "root accumulator hash" that
starts empty and is gradually filled by adding each hash of a
`EpochRewardReserve`. The distribution process continues until the "root
accumulator hash" matches the "root hash" stored in `EpochRewardHistory`. At this
point, the reward distribution for the current epoch is complete and we can
safely assume that there will be no further distributions for the remainder of
the epoch.

### Restrict Stake Account Access

To avoid the complexity and potential rewards in unexpected stake accounts, all

> write access to stake accounts are restricted. That means any update to stake

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need to restrict all write access to stake account actually. For example credit of lamports to a stake account would not be a problem.

Instead we had discussed was disabling the stake program entirely from the start of an epoch through the completion of rewards distribution, where any attempt to invoke the stake program results in a new unique error code like "StakeProgramUnavailable".

replay process. The bank replay process won't replaying any blocks after
`Epoch_start+N` unless the reward computation has completed. If the reward
calculation is slow and hasn't complete the computation at block-height
`Epoch_start + N`, the bank replay process will block and wait until the reward
computation is finished, before processing any blocks with height greater than
`N`.

After the full rewards result is calculated, the result is partitioned into
distribution chunks, which will be distributed during the `reward distribution`
phase.

To ensure that each block distributes a subset of the rewards in a
deterministic manner for the current epoch, while also randomizing the
distribution across different epochs, the partitioning of all rewards will be
done as follows. First, a new key is generated for each reward by hashing the
account's public key with the epoch number (i.e. sha256 hash from
solana_sdk::program::hashv). Then, the rewards are sorted by the new key and
divided into `M` bins. This process will ensure that the reward distribution is
deterministic for the current epoch, while also introducing a degree of

> randomness between epochs.

Reviewer 3: however this will make an O(1) distribution block lookup for any individual account impossible. something the proposal similarly precludes as well... :thinking:

                     |             |
                     |  root_hash  |
                     |             |
                     +------+------+
                            |
    +--------------+--------+-----------+
    |              |                    |
+---+----+   +-----+--+             +---+-----+
|reserve |   | reserve|   ......    | reserve |
| hash   |   |  hash  |             |  hash   |
+--------+   +--------+             +---------+

```

### `EpochRewardReserve` Sysvar Account

`EpochRewardReserve` sysvar account tracks the reward to be distributed for one
particular block in the `reward distribution phase`.

The address for a particular `EpochRewardReserve` account is derived from the
base Sysvar RewardReserve address and u64 block height for the corresponding reward
distribution block during the reward distribution phase, i.e.
`address = hash("SysvarRewardReserve11111111111111111111111111111", block_height)`.

```
crate::declare_sysvar_id!("SysvarRewardReserve11111111111111111111111111111", EpochRewardReserve);

struct EpochRewardReserve {
   reserve_hash: Hash,
}
```

The account balance of `RewardsReserve` is equal to the total amount (in

> lamports) of all rewards to be distributed in a block. The `reserve_hash` is

Reviewer 3: how will we handle the case where an `EpochRewardReserve` account already exists as a system account. this would occur should someone deposit some lamports there prior to the Epoch Rewards Period.  similarly should someone deposit lamports into the account _during_ the Epoch Rewards Period, leaving an excess balance after all anticipated rewards have been distributed.

i think the only thing that makes sense is to shadow the account's lamports field with an `epoch_rewards_lamports` field in the account data that runtime fully controls.  we c an autopromote the system account to a sysvar account at creation and burn any excess lamports at the end of distribution, so long as `epoch_rewards_lamports` is zero.

   add? Is the added time okay for the network?

1. How to adapt the current epoch reward and inflation related RPC methods for
   new way of computing epoch rewards? What kind of new RPC APIs to provide for
   to access the `EpochRewardProof`? What's the impact for solana downstream
   project?

#### Reward distribution challenges

1. What are the incentives for the leader to pack reward redeem transactions?
   What kind of block fees will the leader receive for packing such
   transactions? Who will pay for the fees for such transactions? Who will be
   the signer for those transactions? What prevents a malicious leader from not
   packing those reward distribution transactions?

   There are two ideas to incentivize the leader to include reward redeeming
   transactions.

   The first idea is to have the network reject the block that doesn't have all
   the rewards redeemed. This would requires that all the nodes to keep track of
   what rewards should be redeemed in a block, and verify that the actual block
   have the expected rewards. Otherwise, the block will be rejected. The
   downside of this idea is that it will add extra complexity in block replay
   stage.

>    The second idea is to change up the inflation economics to add a "redeemer

Reviewer 2: "redeemer reward" is a big problem because now we need to argue over the economics of the reward, and there'll likely be a lot of people with "input". Best if we can avoid that entirely.

Expecting each block post epoch boundary to distribute N rewards, in a known order, seems way better. I feel this doesn't even need to be done by an instruction in a new program. This can just be bank.rs stuff that happens before, after or concurrently with normal transaction processing for a block

Author: Hmm. That sounds like what we have implemented for V1, in which all the rewards are sorted and distributed at the bank "new" time before processing any normal transactions.

   one epoch, it needs to be around 0.016 SOL (5000 lamports * 162.5 epochs per
   year / 5% inflation / 1_000_000_000 lamports per SOL). So if we also restrict
   the minimum reward earning amount to 1 SOL, and that earns 312,500 lamports /
   epoch in rewards, with a minimum of 93k lamports at 1.5% inflation. 1% of
   that is ~1k lamports, so not too far from a transaction fee. If they can pack
   in 25 accounts in one transaction, hen they still come out on top.

1. What's the performance impact for other transactions in the same block during
   reward distribution? Will it impact the fee model for those blocks?

1. Where should the `DistributeReward` instruction be executed? By the bank
   runtime, or by some native program such as stake program, or by a specialized
   bpf program in bpf executor? Which way is better?

1. Will current transaction schedule be able to handle the new epoch reward
   transactions? When there is a burst of transaction inflow for those blocks,
   can we guarantee that the `DistributeReward` transaction will be scheduled?

1.  How to handle validator restart and snapshot taking during reward
    calculation/distribution?

>     - Option 1: prevent taking snapshot and restarting from snapshot during

Reviewer 2: I feel it needs to some variant of Option 2. The cluster restart case in particular is problematic here because the current approach of using the `--wait-for-supermajority` flag requires the ledger/snapshot leading up to the restart slot already be present: the repair service in particular is not started until after the "`--wait-for-supermajority`" processing completes in the Labs validator.

Author: yes. I tried it on a test cluster. Option 1 doesn't work with cluster restart.

Another idea for option 2 is when we take snapshot for a bank during reward interval, we force to store the reward result. If the reward result is not available yet, we will wait till the RewardCalculationService have the result. This way, we don't need to store stake_cache in the snapshot. And there is only one kind of snapshot layout rather than two.

that all stake accounts are properly accounted for and rewarded. While this may
be an inconvenience for some users, overall it is likely to help ensure the
fairness and accuracy of the reward distribution process.

Overall, the changes to stake accounts during the epoch rewarding phase are
intended to improve the efficiency, reliability of network's reward
distribution mechanism, and to minimize the risk of unintended consequences or
disruptions to the network's operations.

## Security Considerations

Epoch rewards in a blockchain system are an important component that helps to
incentivize network participants to secure the network and maintain its
operations. Changing epoch rewards can have a significant impact on the
network's overall stability and the behavior of network participants.
Therefore, any changes to epoch rewards should be carefully considered and
tested before rolling out.

The addition of sysvar accounts can provide some additional safeguards to
prevent large capital changes, but it is important to note that they do not
eliminate all risks associated with changing epoch rewards.

## Backwards Compatibility

> The new epoch payout approach will not be incompatible with the old approach.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The new epoch payout approach will now be incompatible with the old approach.
```

Reviewer 4: Maybe it is still compatible? My reading of it seems it will not be, but regardless the wording of the sentence is confusing.

Author: Good catch. should be `not compatible`
